Spreadsheets are ubiquitous in corporate finance, and they have a lot of very nice features, especially for financial analysis. However, when investment analysts use spreadsheets for purposes it was not designed for, it can be a hassle. Often, they use it as a reporting tool, which it is not; and it is becoming increasingly common for some analysts to create very elaborated and complicated spreadsheets to collect huge amounts of data over time.

Today, private equity firms are swimming in oceans of data. The incoming data is diverse – balance sheets, income statements, statements of cash flow, operating metrics, debt schedules, budgets vs. actual, segment data, month/quarterly/annual data points, etc. But what they are increasingly finding is that the costs associated with data analysis go far beyond the cost of the data itself.

The spreadsheet tools that analysts currently use were developed in simpler times, when data was often difficult (or expensive) to access. And to manage portfolio companies data efficiently and make that data ready for analysis, there are a number of steps that need to be taken. These steps include, but are not limited to: (i) collecting and structuring the data, (ii) cleaning and standardizing the data, (iii) linking the data with other data sets, (iv) generating aggregations or new data attributes, (v) storing it in a database, and (vi) making it available for investment decisions.

I created this course https://lnkd.in/ddUHczsG partly in service to future investment analysts who may be interested in financial modeling programming. In class I use a simple prescription: Think big, start small, and grow fast. Students will start by collecting data from a portfolio of insurance companies and store it in a powerful-easy-to-access format. Once they have collected all the data from spreadsheets and pdfs, they will undertake a process of building, testing, and iterating data-driven solutions (eg., dynamic dashboards and hard-copy reports), then rapidly scaling them to achieve maximum impact. The central goal is to teach students how to get financial data and formulations out of spreadsheets, however foreign or daunting it may have seemed at the outset.

Based on previous experiences, there is a great demand for students who can apply the tidy data modeling techniques covered in class. When value creation is more important than ever in many corporate deals, private equity firms have a significant opportunity to use data science to their advantage. Low-investment, high-ROI approaches can be applied to meet the objectives of limited holding periods with limited budgets for investment. Digital levers based on data science can not only generate significant value during the holding period but also be a crucial part of the investment thesis for the subsequent buyer.

Article: https://www.linkedin.com/posts/rnfc_barbairians-at-the-gate-the-financial-opportunity-activity-7102731634067533825-PNZ6/